
--- PAGE 1 ---
Prediction of Finger Flexion
4th Brain-Computer Interface Data Competition
Kai J. Miller 1,2 and Gerwin Schalk 3,4,5
1Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
2Program in Neurobiology and Behavior, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
3Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York
4Department of Neurology, Albany Medical College, Albany, New York
5Department of Neurosurgery, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri
(Dated: June 11, 2008)
The goal of this element of the competition is to predict the ﬂexion of individual ﬁngers from
signals recorded from the surface of the brain (electrocorticography (ECoG)). This data set contains
brain signals from three subjects, as well as the time courses of the ﬂexion of each of ﬁve ﬁngers.
The task in this competition is to use the provided ﬂexion information in order to predict ﬁnger
ﬂexion for a provided test set. The performance of the classiﬁer will be evaluated by calculating the
average correlation coeﬃcient r between actual and predicted ﬁnger ﬂexion.
FIG. 1: ECoG signals in train data(time,channel) and
test data(time,channel) were acquired from each electrode
with respect to a scalp reference and ground before re-
referencing with respect to the common average.
I. SUBJECTS
The three subjects in the data set were epileptic pa-
tients at Harborview Hospital in Seattle, Washington.
Each patient had electrode grids placed subdurally on
the surface of the brain for the purpose of extended clini-
cal monitoring and localization of seizure foci. Each sub-
ject gave informed consent to participate in this study,
which was approved by the internal review board (IRB)
of Harborview Hospital. All patient data have been
anonymized according to IRB protocol in accordance
with HIPAA regulations.
II. RECORDINGS
Signals from the electrode grid were ampliﬁed and dig-
itized using Synamps2 ampliﬁers (Neuroscan, El Paso,
TX). The general-purpose BCI system BCI2000 [1] pro-
vided visual stimuli to the patient, acquired brain sig-
nals from the Synamps2 system, and also recorded the
ﬂexion of individual ﬁngers (on the hand contralateral
to the implanted grid) using a data glove (Fifth Dimen-
sion Technologies, Irvine, CA). BCI2000 stored the brain
signals, the timing of stimulus presentation, and the ﬂex-
ion of each of the ﬁngers in a data ﬁle. Data ﬁles were
converted to Matlab format for this competition. Each
patient had subdural electrode arrays (Ad-Tech, Racine,
WI) implanted. Each array contained 48-64 platinum
electrodes that were conﬁgured in 8x6 or 8x8 arrange-
ments. The electrodes had a diameter of 4 mm (2.3mm
exposed), 1 cm inter-electrode distance, and were em-
bedded in silastic. Electrocorticographic (ECoG) signals
(i.e., 62, 48, and 64 channels from subjects 1, 2, and 3,
respectively) were acquired with respect to a scalp ref-
erence and ground (Fig. 1), band pass ﬁltered between
0.15 to 200 Hz, and sampled at 1000 Hz.
III. EXPERIMENT AL PROTOCOL
The subjects were cued to move a particular ﬁnger by
displaying the corresponding word (e.g., ”thumb”) on a
computer monitor placed at the bed-side (Fig. 2). Each
cue lasted two seconds and was followed by a two-second
rest period during which the screen was blank. During
each cue, the subjects typically moved the requested ﬁn-
ger 3-5 times. This number varied across subjects and
ﬁngers. There were 30 movement stimulus cues for each
ﬁnger (i.e., a total of 150 cue presentations and about
90-150 ﬂexions of each ﬁnger); stimulus cues were inter-
leaved randomly. This experiment lasted 10 minutes for
each subject.
Subsequent oﬄine analysis showed that ring (4 th) ﬁn-

--- PAGE 2 ---
2
FIG. 2: Capturing individual ﬁnger ﬂexion: each subject
moved a ﬁnger several times in response to a visual cue. Fin-
ger ﬂexion was recorded using a dataglove. The task in this
competition is to use the provided ECoG signals to predict the
ﬂexion of each ﬁnger during the last 1 /3 of the experiment.
ger movements were correlated with either middle (3 rd)
or little (5 th) ﬁnger movements. Thus, while this ring
(4th) ﬁnger position is included with the training data,
it will not be used for evaluation purposes.
IV. DA T A STRUCTURE
The data for each subject are contained in a separate
MATLAB ﬁle that is named “subX comp.mat” where
“X” denotes the subject number. Each ﬁle contains three
variables:
• “train data” - this variable, in time × channels,
gives the ﬁrst 2 /3 (6 min, 40s) of recorded ECoG
signals (400,000 samples at 1kHz sampling rate per
channel) from the speciﬁed experiment, for every
channel.
• “train dg” - this variable, in time × ﬁnger is the
ﬁrst 2 /3 (6 min, 40s) of recorded ﬁnger position
(thumb - index - middle - ring - little; 400,000 sam-
ples (super-sampled to 1 kHz) per ﬁnger) for the
associated experiment.
• “test data” - this variable, in time× channels, gives
the last 1/3 (3 min, 20s) of recorded ECoG signals
(200,000 samples at 1kHz sampling rate per chan-
nel) from the speciﬁed experiment, for every chan-
nel. These data will be used to predict the ﬁnal
1/3 (3 min, 20s) of recorded ﬁnger position (thumb
- index - middle - ring - little) for the associated
experiment.
Please note that the channel order has been scrambled.
V. EV ALUA TION CRITERIA
Each participating group will submit three ﬁles titled
“sub1 eval”, “sub2 eval”, and “sub3 eval”, corresponding
to subjects 1-3, respectively. Each of these will contain a
single variable, “eval dg,” with dimensions 200,000 × 5:
• “eval dg” - this variable, in time × channels, shall
give the last 1 /3 (3 min, 20s) of predicted ﬁnger
ﬂexion for each of the ﬁve ﬁngers (thumb - index -
middle - ring - little) for the associated experiment
(200,000 samples per ﬁnger).
The evaluation criteria will be as follows: for each sub-
ject, the received variable “eval dg” will be compared
with the actual ﬁnger positions in “test dg,” which
we have retained. We will calculate the correlation
coeﬃcient r between the actual and the predicted
ﬁnger ﬂexions for each subject and ﬁnger. We will not
calculate the correlation coeﬃcient for the 4 th (ring)
ﬁnger, because the ﬂexion of this ﬁnger was typically
correlated with the ﬂexion of the 3 rd (middle) or 5 th
(little) ﬁnger. The variable for predicted position should
still be of dimension 200,000 × 5 (i.e., the 4 th column
will not be used for evaluation). The ﬁnal score will be
calculated as the arithmetic mean of the 12 correlation
coeﬃcients (4 per subject, 3 subjects). The submission
with the highest score wins the competition.
VI. SOME THINGS TO KEEP IN MIND...
• The lag between the dataglove position measure-
ment recording and the ampliﬁer measurement is
37ms ( ± 3ms, SEM). This is of the same order of
granularity in the dataglove position (which was
sampled at 25Hz - every 40ms).
• There is a characteristic delay between brain activ-
ity and resulting ﬁnger movement. You may want
to take this into account.
• Please cite [2] when you use this dataset in a pub-
lication.
[1] Schalk, G., McFarland, D.J., Hinterberger, T., Birbaumer,
N., and Wolpaw, J.R. BCI2000: a general-purpose brain-
computer interface (BCI) system, IEEE Trans Biomed
Eng, 51(6): 1034-1043, 2004.
[2] Schalk, G., Kubanek, J., Miller, K.J., Anderson, N.R.,
Leuthardt, E.C., Ojemann, J.G., Limbrick, D., Moran,
D.W., Gerhardt, L.A., and Wolpaw, J.R. Decoding Two-
Dimensional Movement Trajectories Using Electrocortico-
graphic Signals in Humans, J Neural Eng , 4: 264-275,
2007.